---
layout:	post
title:	"Creating a mini-uptime"
date:	2019-10-11
---

One of my big desires growing up was having a homelab. The concept was always such a fascinating and thrilling one for me, the idea of expanding/growth, limitless creativity expressions and building SOMETHING definitely got fired up. And oooh, has that been a reality. I bought a mini server rack since I received a Dell R710 from my previous employment. I didn't have much use for it before I moved to California, I had to leave it in my home state as I had such limited room and uncertainty of my living situation. When I came back to my home town the idea finally could come to fruition. I started off with a small server rack and my R710. It quickly expanded to an R620, mini-PC and some switches. Doing this has taught me a lot about how exhausting it is to move servers around and bolt together a server rack, but more importantly, it has allowed me to learn beyond my specialties.

Homelabs to me are so important, it creates a sandbox environment where you can play and learn anything and see the fruits of your work. I recently bought a NAS and some Red WD, it hurt the bank. But it was much needed, I tried using GDrive and OneDrive, I just found those cloud storages are such a pain to use for consumer level stuff, it created so many problems like permission issues, shadow copies, disappearing files and not syncing between computers. OneDrive especially, for some reason, all your data needs to be downloaded onto each computer, as if distributed computed isn't difficult enough... I put in the hours to pull all my personal digital items like photos from the cloud and onto my computers/external hard drives. It's been scary because my entire livilhood and memories sit on these drives with no redundancy. The money I spent on the NAS and red's are so worth it because I can finally be in control of my data, no need to download it to every single computer or have syncing issues. It's right there in my home. The sense of relieve is washing over me. I already have the NAS and the red's are coming in Monday, I am so excited :)

I really do love having the ability to play around with servers and tech, the no worry of which customers it's going to affect frees me up to take more risks and learn the limits or hack something together without being judged on the quality. With that comes the barriers that you have to solve, and I love that. When you start to expand more and more, there comes a point where it becomes hard to remember it all and where things are and what they are for and what's installed. Configuration managers help a lot with this but before installing and configuring something hefty like a config manager, something simple to scale up is a little service discovery app. At least, that's is what I want to call it. I hacked together a flask app that uses paramiko to log onto my router which uses dnsmasq to resolve local host names (which was a pain to set up at first on a Edge router). It queries the DHCP leases using vbash and returns the output. From there I did a bit more programming and used nmap to figure out what is up and down, jam it into a HTML table. This was something that probably took me a few hours to do but the thrill of learning this all from scratch and seeing that I'm iteratively solving the problems of having several computers talk to each other and managing the devices certainly have transferred some over to a production environment. (Here is the code if you want to look, it's simple: https://github.com/Remillardj/decouvrir)

Looking at my mini data center makes me happy, limitless creativity and problem solving.