---
layout:	post
title:	"Denied"
date:	2020-08-07
---

# Denied
Being denied isn't always something that bothers me. I accept it's part of the statistic and I move on knowing I'll hit the mark, but sometimes it can hit closer to home. Especially when my heart is really in it, it's something I have worked towards, and when I don't even have a reason why I was denied. It may seem like any typical problem, but realistically everyone, including myself, can push through it with a little mind-block. But sometimes its that specific denial that really drives it home. It puts you many steps back, you're no longer at peak performance, things are wobbly, and focusing is more difficult. It's that throwing-you-off denial that really strikes. Demoralizing.

## Karate
I did karate for a bit, and to my credit I got pretty darn good pretty darn quick. I worked really hard and pushed through a lot of self-doubts, whether put on myself or from others or another group. It was difficult but my eye was on the prize, knowing it was a statistic and weaponizing my youth. Ultimately what I think shielded me from a demoralizing denial is the fact that I couldn't really compare myself. I was much older when I started where the sport at the level I was competing is filled with people that started when they were five years old. Occassionally, I ran into someone similar but it was always a good battle, I won here and they won there, not much to compare.

## Skateboarding
As young as I was, as much of a hoon skaters are, I took it seriously. I really loved doing it and I would spend countless hours at the park just working on tricks and creating a style. I remember distinctly the confusion I had in my mind as to why my legs were not working to the standard it usually does. I was simply overworking them! I didn't care that I couldn't land a trick every time, I just loved the feeling of landing them. Of course like anyone, if I seemingly lost all my skills for a few days, it would be demoralizing and piss me off. It was a sport that I could compare since I was so young, it was really hard at times but it motivated me to work harder. Knowing "they did it, so can I". I had several moments where the demoralizing denial was harsh but I was able to push through out of love for the sport.

## Technology
Fortunately I started young. And of course like anything, there was someone always better than me. However, I had the upperhand here in the group of people I knew. None of them were ever into tech so I got a headstart. I knew how to do a lot of things well before other people started to get into them, it was a good feeling being ahead of the curve. I did love learning and using the newfound knowledge, that was my overall focus though. So there wasn't much to compare too other than what I couldn't do before. The only demoralizing denials are the time where I was overwhelmed with a realm that really took time to understand. I did learn how to keep at it and I got there. Even with jobs, there were times I knew I could do the job better but the hiring manager preferred their nephew. Or when I knew I would fit the role perfectly yet I never received a call back, or even when everything went well and I was denied. It was all part of a statistic, sure it sucked but I knew there was something else out there for me. It was easy to move forward because all it took was going to indeed or LinkedIn and apply for a few more.

## Racing
This is a new area for me. Something I just picked up a little over a year ago and it's a great way to get humbled. I knew going into racing that it's one of the most competitive fields out there, and there will always be someone much better as the talented is overflowing. This is an area where the motto I have of "hard work beats talent, when talent doesn't work hard", simply doesn't apply. You need to work hard *and* have talent, and frankly, luck with having a vast amount of money, else you won't get anywhere. There are ways to build yourself into it and be competitive within a reasonable budget, but here is where I have experienced the most demoralizing denials. Here, there are people who have been in the sport since they couldn't walk to absolute prodigies where they sit in a car and all of a sudden set a track record. The spectrum is so vast with a similar feeling of standing at the Grand Canyon's to hiking Mount Rainier. You feel little. But you do it because you love it, you start hiking up knowing you're going to get beat but you'll only get stronger. So you keep going and moving those dead legs further up the hill, perhaps theres a bear or you slip and tumble back a bit, but that's okay because the prize is just upwards, you can see it. See, with hiking, some people may tap out, some people are much more in shape because they worked hard and can fly past you. But in racing, there are people who can create avalanches, you can try to dodge them and you probably will to an extent, but sooner or later there won't be an exit. You just got to embrace the hit. And it hits hard.

Losing is part of racing, emotions are hightened so words can fly off the handle, I understood that going in. But I didn't expect was people who seemingly have strong opinions with random backings. They shut you down faster than you can say another word and their word is final. Perhaps, this is part of the sport. It doesn't matter if you're correct, it only matters with the number of people that agree. That demoralizes to a level that I haven't really experienced in a sport. I'm not sure how to keep pushing past it.

I have faced a lot of walls and obstacles in my life, surely this might be one of them. It's hard to weaponize your youth in this situation because there are many people who pick up a controller or sit in a car and somehow are substantially faster than you. That part sucks a lot. It's hard *not* to compare. I'll get there, I know that, I love it, I know that, but nothing shuts you down faster than being denied by everyone around you.